---
layout: post
title: Why You Should Vote, and for a Major Candidate
date: 2012-11-03 09:30:00
---
A lot of the people I talk with these days are one flavor or another of
libertarians.  Libertarians pride themselves on being
independent-minded, but the tendency to pull away from the herd can
often lead to anti-fashion fads.  The Paleo diet, for example, is
popular among a strain of libertarians.  So is not voting (or voting for
a minor candidate).  
  
There are a few families of arguments for why you shouldn't vote, or
should vote for a minor candidate, which I will sum up as:  
  

1.  The chances of one vote being decisive are infinitesimally low.
    therefore its essentially never worth the time to vote
2.  No major candidate is within a (generally very small) acceptable
    deviation from the person's own views (this is sometimes called a
    "protest vote")
3.  Voting is immoral because it endorses the winner's use of power
    which the person believes to be immoral (e.g., choices in law
    enforcement or foreign policy)

I think all of these are bad arguments, and I'll explain why in turn.
 But first, I want to lay out my basic framework for how voting works
and why you should do it.

  

A Simple Theory of Voting
-------------------------

In a modern democracy, a vote is an endowment of power to everyone
enfranchised individual—power to choose political leaders. Citizens (I
am going to be sloppy here and use "citizens" to mean "people who are
allowed to vote") are endowed with this power whether they want it or
not.

  

In an election, a citizen can do one of three things with his voting
power.  First, he can vote for the candidate of his choosing who has a
realistic chance of winning (what I'm calling a "major" candidate).
 Second, he can vote for a candidate who does not have a realistic
chance of winning (what I'm calling a "minor" candidate).  Third, he can
not vote.

  

In both the second and third cases, the citizen cedes his power to
choose his political leader.  That power does not disappear; someone is
still elected, and the elected official still has the same state power
by virtue of his election. In fact what he does is divide up his little
portion of power among all the remaining people who are making that
choice.

  

I believe, and I think most people believe, that people have a moral
responsibility to utilize their resources to create the world they think
best. Or to put it another way, I don't think anyone would defend using
resources in a way that that person believes would make the world worse
off.  But this is what the non-voter (and the minor candidate voter, who
I'm going to lump in with the nonvoter from here on) does.

  

The nonvoter, by his withdrawal, makes the pool of people making the
same choice he would (if forced to) smaller, relative to pool or pools
that would make different choices.  He is therefore necessarily enabling
the world he thinks worse.

  

So that's my basic argument.  Now to the objections.

  

Fifty Plus One
--------------

Now, what of the argument that one vote will almost certainly not decide
the election? I will cede the premise, although it is more true for the
presidency than for, say, a mayoral race or city council seat.  But the
problem with this line of thinking is that an actual vote decides far
more than who holds office.  It is a general showing of support for a
candidate and his platform.

  

A candidate who wins handily has a mandate to govern that is stronger
than the  candidate who wins by a small margin.  Margins—especially
combined with the results (and margins) of other races— determine the
political landscape for the immediately following period.

  

This is even more true in the age of micro-targeting and statistical
analysis, where a single voter's impact on the share of middle-aged
white women (for example) is much larger than their impact on the share
of the electorate as a whole.

  

Some will answer that the effect is still incredibly small.  That's a
bad argument, but it's a really bad argument for a libertarian, because
libertarians understand prices.  An individual decision to buy or not
buy at a price is usually not, in an of itself, price-setting.  But it
has a marginal impact that, in the aggregate, allows the price system to
spread knowledge throughout society.  In the same way, voting patters
spread knowledge throughout the political world.

  

What if the Candidates Suck?
----------------------------

The candidates *do* suck.  Always.  They will always suck because to be
a major candidate they have to get a lot of people with very different
opinions on board.

  

The protest voters seem to believe that, by withholding their votes,
they can move the major candidates in their direction the next time
around.  There is a hint of truth to this: if a part of a major
candidate's coalition moves away, he'll probably try to figure out why
and get them back.  But only if they're already part of the coalition,
and only if he isn't gaining more than he's losing.

  

The basic problem with the libertarian protest voters is that they were
never part of the coalition, and now expect to dominate it, despite not
being dominant in size. The Ron Paul partisans in 2008, for example,
tried to have a conversation with the Republican Party that went like
this:

> Paulites: Nominate Ron Paul (repeated many times)  
> GOP: What? No. What?  
> Paulites: Then we won't vote for you!  
> GOP: You weren't voting for us anyway. Bugger off.

Paul supporters were actually *surprised* this didn't work as intended.
 And this mistake is being repeated with Gary Johnson.  
  
If you want a coalition to play ball with you, you have to play ball
with the coalition. And that means you don't always get exactly what you
want.  If you always take your ball and go home, nobody will ever want
to play with you. And, in the current political world, that's what
libertarian protest voters do.  
  

Not in My Name
--------------

I have more respect for people who don't want to sanction what they
consider to be immoral state action. But I don't buy it, for the reason
laid out above.  The choice is still made.  The fact that you are
putting another layer of separation between yourself and the choice—by
empowering the rest of the electorate instead of yourself—doesn't really
diminish your part in it, in any way that I can find morally meaningful.

  

And I find it impossible, truly impossible, for someone to say that all
choices are equally immoral.  That just means that you're too lazy to do
your homework.  No two things are ever meaningfully the same; this is
where demurral actually becomes intellectual cowardice.

  

Some will argue that I'm saying you should vote for the lesser of two
(or more) evils.  Yes, yes, a thousand times yes!  Less evil is good.
 Like, by definition.  When did "less evil" become a bad thing?  And if
you do not use your power to make things less evil (as you see it) you
will—again, necessarily—empower those who want to make things more evil
(as you see it).

  

A Note on Third Parties and Independent Candidates
--------------------------------------------------

You may have noticed that I've shied away from saying things like "both
major candidates" or explicitly referring to a two-party structure.
 This is because there are situations where someone who is not a
Democrat or Republican will be a major candidate. This has been true in
many state and local elections, and was most recently true at a national
level in 1992, when Ross Perot's early polling showed that people were
truly willing to consider electing him.

  

Polls, especially polls long ahead of the election, are not the same as
voting. I think that someone who said he would vote for Gary Johnson in
November of 2011 can be taken entirely seriously; someone who votes for
Gary Johnson in November of 2012 is an idiot.  But if support can be
shown, I'm not tied to a two-party system.

  

And what of the drive to get the Libertarian party to 5% here and there
so that they get matching funding and other perks next time around? I
think it's silly.  The Libertarian Party, in general, is silly because
it fields silly candidates who aren't worth 5% of the vote.  Gary
Johnson was probably the best chance they've ever had at a respectable
candidate because he ran a state, and by all accounts well.  He ruined
that by being a terrible politician and debater, and because he couldn't
get past the drug thing to the issues people actually care about right
now.

  

Let me put it this way: let's say that Libertarians leech enough votes
from Romney to hit 5% in a few states and secure an Obama victory.
 Who's on deck for the nomination?  What will crossing that 5% barrier
really achieve in the real world?  Now what is the cost to Libertarians
(big-L, here) of a second Obama term, relative to a Romney turn?  The
cost-benefit just doesn't make sense.

  

Closing Thoughts
----------------

I didn't vote in 2006, because I didn't want to say I voted for the
Democrat.  But I helped him to win, and made him more powerful (he was,
at the least, not an awful human being). And I knew what I was doing.

  

It saddens me to see so many people not vote, not because they're making
a tacit choice to help the side they would normally oppose, but because
they're essentially too cool for school.  Or because they buy into
totally bogus ways of thinking about voting.

  

Or because they're afraid to be held responsible for making a choice.

  

In particular I think that libertarians, to whom this (expansive) post
is mostly addressed, have done great harm to themselves and to the
liberty they care so much about by withdrawing *en masse* from the
electoral process that ultimately decides how much liberty we have in
this country.

  

Guys, it's time to cut the crap. Go vote.  For somebody who might
actually win.
