---
layout: post
title: More on Margins and Morality
date: 2012-11-03 20:39:00
---
The estimable Sam Patterson, a friend a colleague of mine and lead
writer for [Crony
Chronicles](http://www.google.com/url?sa=t&rct=j&q=&esrc=s&source=web&cd=1&cad=rja&ved=0CB8QFjAA&url=http%3A%2F%2Fcronychronicles.org%2F&ei=N0yVUI6pOK-z0QH87YHABg&usg=AFQjCNESQfQYPoUIZ1oNh2Vb27qRADUwKQ),
[disagrees](http://samuelrpatterson.wordpress.com/2012/11/03/why-you-shouldnt-vote-especially-for-a-major-candidate/)
with my
[post](http://www.oliversherouse.com/2012/11/why-you-should-vote-and-for-major.html)
on voting.  Not only does he disagree, he set up a whole new blog on
which to do it!  Obviously, he deserves a response.  
  
Sam's arguments, if I parse them correctly, are these:  

1.  Voters have only the illusion of power, because their marginal
    influence is small
2.  There is no real mandate from elections
3.  I cited a moral responsibility without justifying it
4.  There is a real choice in an election
5.  We don't have sufficient knowledge of how a candidate will act, if
    elected
6.  The system is inherently immoral and voting sanctions it

In addition, he disagrees with my statement that libertarians are
sometimes afraid to be held responsible for making a choice.

  
**1.** To the first point, I'll just restate what I said in my original
post: marginal effects matter.  The marginal effect on the strength of
victory matters in the same way that marginal effects on purchasing
decisions matter. Which is to say, quite a bit.  This is a basic
economic concept and a core realization of libertarianism; I don't see
why it's so difficult to recognize it in another context.

  

**2.** To the second point, Sam asks, for example, whether George W.
Bush was restrained in his first term, since his thin victory should
imply a smaller mandate.  The answer is, from Jan.-Sep. 2001,
absolutely.  He knew he barely had a mandate at all, and so he spent a
lot of time doing across-the-aisle coalition building.  That's why he
started with No Child Left Behind, with Ted Kennedy as his main partner.
 That's why his tax cuts got 60 votes in the Senate.  After September of
2001, of course, the political landscape changed radically, and he got a
new agenda and a new mandate, and he pursued it in a different way.  So
that's not much of a counter-example.

  

Mandate-reading is tough, of course.  Clinton correctly read his in 1996
and ended up working with Republicans to balance the budget. Bush in
2004 and Obama in 2008 both over-interpreted and overreached on Social
Security and Health Care, respectively.  But we have to remember that
the size of a mandate affects not only the candidate in question, but
also how other officials react to them.  If Obama's margin were smaller,
for example, he might not have pulled the three Republicans necessary to
pass the stimulus bill.  Libertarian withdrawal helped make that happen.

  

**3.** I was a bit surprised to see Sam question my statement of moral
responsibility, not because I'm a particularly authoritative moral
philosopher, but because it didn't imply much more than the word
"should" in the title.   Sam's right that people may think follow their
own self interest or whatever their rule for a better world happens to
be, but that doesn't change the argument.  The argument is, if you act
in a way that brings about the world you think worse, then on your own
terms you are acting immorally. That's pretty much the definition of
having a moral system, and I don't even need to pick one for my argument
to work.

  

**4.** We get to some of the real meat with Sam's fourth point that
there isn't always a meaningful choice.  Specifically, Sam notes how his
own top issue is one where there is minimal difference between the
current candidates.  Let's assume that's true.  Unless that issue is the
only one that has moral value—and it isn't of course—the fact that the
candidates largely agree on it doesn't change anything. When you take
the candidate's positions and bundled, there are meaningful distinctions
literally 100% of of the time. So there is a choice on the election,
even if not on every issue.   And generally there is some level of
choice on each issue, even if there is similarity between the
candidate's positions. 

  

**5.** His fifth point is probably the best counter to my post that I've
seen so far.  If elected officials act essentially randomly after their
election, then there is no point in voting.  But they don't.  There is a
range of probable courses that you can figure out by looking at a
candidate's record, by looking at their advisers, and so on.  In
reality, this point shows why we should do a lot more than vote; we
should work to make sure that when officials shift, they shift in the
direction we think best.  But it doesn't show why we shouldn't vote.  
  
Sam asks when we get to ratify a change in direction from pre-election
rhetoric.  That's pretty obvious to me: at the next election.  The 2010
election was a refusal to ratify the 2009-2010 actions of the Democratic
Congress and White House.  The 2012 election will be another opportunity
to voice opinions. And there are alternate ways the electorate can air
its opinions between elections, although ultimately none is quite as
efficacious as voting.   
  
**6.** Finally, Sam argues that we sanction an inherently immoral system
by voting in it.  We should work, instead, to undermine it. I assume, at
least, that's the alternative; Sam doesn't explicitly lay one out.
Interestingly, I don't think Sam can articulate a meaningful definition
of "sanction" without invoking exactly the same marginal effects
argument I rely on and he denies.  
  
Here Sam says we'll have to agree to disagree, and he's probably right.
 As far as I can understand it, Sam (along with a great many other
libertarians—I'm in the minority here), sees freedom as a quality.
 Something is free or it is not.  If it ain't free, he ain't
interested.  
  
I see freedom as a sliding scale, as something you get more or less of.
I believe, in the political realm, more freedom is better than less, and
that a bit more freedom in the real world is better than total freedom
in theory. I believe that losing less freedom in the real world is
better than total freedom in theory.  I don't live in theory and neither
does anyone else.  
  
I can only concern myself with the real world, where people live and act
and prosper and suffer and die.  So until I hear a meaningful way of
getting from here to there than I've ever heard from the other
perspective, I'm sticking with how to influence the real world.  Which
includes, but is not limited to, voting.  
  
**Bonus Round: **As a final aside, Sam asks how voters are held
responsible for their choices, as I claim some libertarians are afraid
to be.  I'll admit that I wasn't intending to talk about voters
generally in that sentence, but rather libertarians, a group of people
who talk about politics with each other and are (unfortunately) rather
insular.  It is in their conversations with each other that the sanction
takes place.  
  
Sam says he voted for Bush in 2004, but now (I think) recants.  I voted
for Bush in 2004, and I would do so again, knowing what I know. I'm
going to vote for Romney with my eyes wide open, and I'll have to defend
that to people (I'll make a first stab at that in the coming days). I'll
have to answer for my choices to my friends, my colleagues, people I
know and respect.  So that's how I'll be held responsible, and that's
what I was talking about.  
  
In closing this second gargantuan post, I'll just say that I'm glad not
only that I've provoked a reaction, which was the point, but both from
Sam and from folks on Facebook and elsewhere, I've provoked thoughtful
and well-reasoned reactions from people who really, passionately think
I'm full of it.  Which is ultimately the way it should be.
