---
layout: post
title: No, Hayek Would Not Have Supported the ACA
date: 2013-02-16 10:00:00
---
Nick Gillespie's interview of Eric Angner for ReasonTV is making
catching some attention in libertarian circles.  Angner's thesis, first
presented in a Politico
[op-ed](http://www.politico.com/news/stories/0612/77805.html), is that
the individual mandate in the Affordable Care Act would be entirely
consistent with a Hayekian view of freedom, and in tune with what Angner
identifies as Hayek's views on the redistribution of wealth.  Here's the
video:  

<iframe src="//www.youtube.com/embed/RmrpMfTT1MY?rel=0" allowfullscreen>
</iframe>
  
Angner makes two mistakes, I think, and I'll deal with the lesser
mistake first.  
  
In the Politico op-ed, he relies on two quotes to demonstrate Hayek's
support for universal healthcare by mandate.  The first is from 1944's
*The Road to Serfdom*, where Hayek says "In the case of sickness and
accident, … the case for the state helping to organize a comprehensive
system of social insurance is very strong."  The second is from 1960's
*The Constitution of Liberty*, where Hayek says "“Perhaps there is also
a case for making [health insurance] compulsory since many who could
thus provide for themselves might otherwise become a public charge."   
  
This is pretty thin.   The *Road to Serfdom* line is a throwaway in a
small paragraph the primary point of which was to distinguish ideas like
social insurance from the type of centralized economic planning that
that book was really about.  It also came early in Hayek's development
as a general social philosopher, before his views on questions like
social insurance were fully formed.  The whole point of *The
Constitution of Liberty* was to think through those questions in a
systematic way.  
  
And in that work, Hayek takes a very dim view of so-called social
insurance programs.  He openly mocks the idea that there is a level of
health that can be assured to everyone in a society as utterly
unrealistic and argues that the primary driver of social insurance
programs has been the desire to redistribute wealth.  
  
The argument Angner misidentifies goes something like this:  Hayek
acknowledged that there was a naturally built social principle that
provision should be made for the extremely needy.  If someone is in an
accident or shot, for example, it's unlikely (illegal, now) for them to
be denied care, regardless of ability to pay.  Therefore, there is less
moral hazard in forcing people to buy health insurance to prevent them
from preying on the goodwill of their neighbors.  
  
But the kind of insurance Hayek was talking about is very different from
the kind mandated by the ACA.  Hayek was talking about true insurance: a
hedge against an unforeseeable problem—what we sometimes call
catastrophic coverage.  The ACA mandates the purchase of something
that's called insurance, but which is really a joint payment plan in
which the young and healthy pay the bills of the ill and the old.  
  
Under the ACA, you have to buy insurance for things you know are going
to happen (*e.g.*, regular doctors visits), as well as things that
aren't basic health care (*e.g.*, birth control).  This kind of system
utterly destroys the price system that Hayek held so dear, because
patients are actually prevented from knowing what they're paying for the
different choices they make.  Which is why prices have been going up and
up and up.  
  
Furthermore, the ACA mandate is not a clear, well-known, and general
rule, but the arbitrary edicts of the Secretary of Health and Human
Services, who can choose to mandate pretty much whatever, common sense
be damned.  This is the opposite of Hayek's view  on how government
should work.  
  
So no.  Hayek would not be happy with the individual mandate.
 Conditional support for one kind of mandate for one kind of insurance
does not equate to support for any health care mandate.  
  
Now, I said there was a larger error in Angner's argument, and there is:
he suggests that Hayek was in favor of redistribution.  In fact, he sees
this as a great opening to bring the left to Hayekian thought.  The
money quote comes at 4:47 in the video above:  
  
> What is consistent with the Hayekian vision, I think, is that this
> idea that you can redistribute resources from people who have more of
> it to people who have less of it and that you can mandate people to
> purchase health insurance.  Hayek does not spend a whole lot of time
> talking about this, but I think we can fill in the blanks.

Horsefeathers.  
  
Hayek was always dead set against redistribution as a goal—on principle,
as well as on economic grounds.  Hayek's works are not obscure or
incomprehensible on this point, and he was not conflicted.  And if
Angner thinks Hayemk didn't spend much time talking about it, here he is
on video:  
  
<iframe src="//www.youtube.com/embed/Ym15cJAR9M4?rel=0" allowfullscreen>
</iframe>

I don't understand how that can be any clearer.  (And, by the by,
Buckley does a fantastic job there of earnestly putting the liberal
case; few conservatives or libertarians today—Buckley, like myself, was
both—understand their opponents so well.)

I think Angner's confusion comes from the idea that the term
"redistribution" retains its simplistic etymological meaning when
employed in economics or political philosophy.  It doesn't.
 Redistribution means one thing and one thing only: making the final
distribution of wealth match some predetermined "just" outcome.

Providing a minimum level of assistance doesn't require that; it only
cuts off one end of the scale, while the distribution of wealth over the
rest of the spectrum can follow its natural course.  The difference is
vitally important.
