---
title: "Should the Results of Scotland's Independence Referendum Matter?"
---

This Thursday, Scotland will hold a referendum on independence. The
conventional wisdom [holds][polls] that the vote will be close, but that the
"No" vote will carry the day. While the UK government does have final say on
constitutional matters (and thus on independence), everyone seems to assume
that it will honor the results of the referendum.

This entire situation highlights the absurdity of making important decisions
through majority-rules direct democracy. Consider the possible outcomes. If the
vote is 52 percent "Yes" to 48 percent "No", then 48 percent of the populace,
some two and a half million souls,[^estimate] will find their links to what
they consider their home country severed. They will be forced, against their
will, to either physically leave their homes to remain within the UK or try to 
mentally and emotionally locate themselves in a new political unit that they do 
not want or recognize as their own.

If, on the other hand, the vote is 52 percent "No" to 48 percent "Yes", then
you've got a similarly massive portion of the nation who actively wants not to
be part of it---and not at some future point, but as soon as possible. No
nation can tolerate that state of affairs for long with tranquility unless we
assume that the no voters are just breezy and faddish. I'm not willing to
believe that.

Surely, for such an important question, fifty-plus-one doesn't cut it. Blindly
following the referendum when public opinion is divided so evenly
can only lead to a sense of disaffected displacement for the losing side. 
Whatever the economic effects,[^economics] the social and psychological effects 
of feeling disconnected from your home country matter. A shared culture, a 
common historical heritage, a sense of community with your fellow 
citizens---these are all things that my fellow libertarians like to wave away 
as "tribalism," but that are in fact necessary parts of forming a human 
identity.

As a matter of practicality the best result on Thursday is a "No" vote, not
because I'm convinced the Scotland should remain part of the UK, but because
it's a push. The Scots can gain independence in the future much more easily
than they can regain union. But that extra time only matters if the Scots use
it to build a real consensus. Perhaps that means that the UK government can do
a better job identifying and satisfying the concerns of those who favor
independence. Maybe it means that the pro-Independence side can do a better job
persuading their fellow Scots that an independent Scotland is not only
attainable and advisable, but a place that will still be their home.

But that consensus has to be established before either side can claim a
legitimate victory. Thursday's referendum can only reveal the contours of the
problem, not the wisest solution. In fact, it has probably already told us all
it can.

[polls]: http://www.huffingtonpost.com/news/scottish-independence/

[^economics]: Not that the economic effects aren't important, but I haven't
    studied them enough to make an argument either way, and they're beside
    the point I'm making.

[^estimate]: Yes, I'm assuming that the polls mirror the country exactly. If
    this bothers you, round down to one million out of five total. I don't see
    how that makes things much better.
