---
layout: post
title: "Kirzner's Inclusive Austrianism"
date: 2014-10-06
---

On Thursday, the Mercatus Center celebrated the 40th anniversary of the Nobel
Prize awarded to F. A. Hayek.[^link]. The keynote speaker was Israel Kirzner,
who Thomson Reuters [predicts] may this year's Nobel Prize in economics. The 
question he posed for the talk was what role the Prize played in reviving the 
Austrian school of economics, but the more interesting aspect of his talk was 
the way he described what it means to be an Austrian.

The central thesis Kirzner proposed was that, following the socialist
calculation debate, Mises and Hayek (the leaders of the Austrian school)  made
important original refinements to the theory of how markets work, but that
these contributions were only recognized after Hayek's Nobel Prize---awarded
for earlier and quite separate work---gave younger economics newfound reason to
examine Hayek's entire career.

The socialist calculation debate, for those not versed in economic history, was
a high-profile argument in the 1920s and 1930s about whether
socialism---defined as state ownership of the means of production---could
actually work.

Mises and Hayek argued that when the state owned the whole structure of 
production from raw materials to consumer goods, there would be no way to know 
which uses for goods---say, iron---were most valued. In a private property 
system, this task is accomplished by prices, but prices don't exists when the 
state simply distributes resources to other parts of the state.

A decade and half after the first formulation of that argument, socialist
economist Oskar Lange came up with what would be considered the final answer. 
Lange argued that you could just *simulate* free floating prices by assigning 
them randomly and then adjusting based on how quickly different resources are 
consumed.

Lange's answer, with some revisions, won the debate as far as the economics
profession was concerned. For this and a few other reasons, the Austrians lost
their reputations in the economics field, and fell into obscurity until the
Hayek won the Nobel.

Kirzner argued that, during that interlude, Mises and Hayek made important
refinements to and elaborations on the theory of market processes that
demonstrated why Lange's answer---and the direction of the economics profession
as a whole---missed the point. He called the key idea of this period
"open-ended thinking."

Lange's problem was that, like the now-mainstream of economics, he relied on
the assumption that every part of the economy was at equilibrium---that supply
and demand was perfectly balanced at every point in the economy, and that this
state of affairs simply needed to be replicated within socialism. This
assumption entails others---perfect competition in every market, for example,
and perfect knowledge of all individuals in the economy. Economists know that
these assumptions are not true, but they will generally say that they are close
enough to true as to not make a difference.

The problem, from the Austrian perspective, is that there are no new products,
no new ideas, no opportunities for improvement anywhere. There are a fixed,
closed set of choices---and all by initial assumption! The Austrian insight was 
that the set of choices in a market system is constantly in flux; competition and
entrepreneurship allowed for the discovery of entirely new possibilities. And
these possibilities are beyond the reach of normal research and development,
because in many cases no-one knows to look for them. They are unknown unknowns.

In Lange's model and all equilibrium model these possibilities disappear, and
with them goes the tether to the real economy. That's not to say that such
models have no place---the mistake in mainstream economics was to give them the
only place, and set aside all consideration of the *process* of markets.

It is this belief, according to Kirzner, that makes one an Austrian. This bar
is far more ecumenical than some might like. You do not have to believe in
Austrian business cycle theory, you don't have to throw out GDP with the
bathwater, and you don't have to worry about radical *a priori* reasoning.
Using this criterion, Kirzner was happy to label [Julian Simon] an Austrian
even though he was also firmly in the Chicago school. Similarly, he absolved
[Russ Roberts], who confessed to finding equilibrium models helpful. The point,
said Kirzner, is to remember that your models are tools and not reality, and
that there are more things in heaven and earth than are dreamt of in your
graduate economics seminar.

By this bar I can consider myself a Austrian, and even remember the sentence 
that turned me into one. It's in Arnold Kling and Nick Shultz's
book, *From Poverty to Prosperity*. Kling and Shultz describe mainstream 
economics by saying that they can explain why it makes more sense to have your 
shirts ironed by a laundry than to do it yourself---specialization, trade, and 
so on. An open-ended economist says that all of that's true. "But have you 
heard of permanent press?" Innovation completely changed the terms of the 
question, and I don't have to iron my shirts at all.

I don't know why, but when I read that example, it clicked. The world expands 
in unexpected ways, and our analyses are only related to the real world when 
they account for that. 

Kirzner says that belief makes me an Austrian, and that's an Austrianism I'm 
quite happy to be a part of.


[^link]: You can watch the video of the entire event [here][video].



[video]: http://mercatus.org/events/40-years-after-nobel-fa-hayek-and-political-economy-progressive-research-program
[predicts]: http://thomsonreuters.com/press-releases/092014/2014-nobel-laureates-predictions
[Julian Simon]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Julian_Simon
[Russ Roberts]: http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Russ_Roberts
