---
title: "The Big Problem With Stata"
date: 2014-10-29
layout: post
category: code
---

I use Python for almost all my data work, but both in my workplace and my field
more generally Stata dominates.  People use Stata for a reason[^beatssas], and it provides
a far wider range of advanced statistical tools than you can find with Python
(at least so far), but I hate working in it.

I've always found it hard to explain to others just *why* I hate it so much.
You can generally get your problem solved, the help files aren't terrible,
there's lots of Google-able help online[^r], you can write functions if you
want to learn how.  And while I find lots of little things annoying (the way
you get variable values, for example, or the terrible do-file editor), the big
problem was the one other people didn't understand.

Today, however, I was re-reading some pages about the [Unix Philosophy], when
I saw something that hit the nail on the head.  It's Rob Pike's Rule 5:

> Rule 5. Data dominates. If you've chosen the right data structures and
> organized things well, the algorithms will almost always be self-evident.
> Data structures, not algorithms, are central to programming

Stata only has one data structure: the dataset. A dataset is a list of columns
of uniform length. You can only have one dataset open at a time.

This is the right data structure for performing the actual analysis of
data---say, a regression---and the wrong data structure for *literally
everything else*. The problem is, 90 percent of doing data work is cleaning,
aligning, adjusting, aggregating, disaggregating, and generally mucking around
with your source data, because source data always comes from people who hate
you. And because the data structure is wrong, you're forced to use algorithms
that look like they come from an H.P. Lovecraft story.

Never having seen anything better, most Stata users seem to be resigned to
doing things like creating an entire column to store a single number and
writing impenetrable loops for simple tasks. Or they use sensible tools to
create their datasets (increasingly Python, but also even something like
Excel) and then use Stata just for the analysis.

The latter is my approach when I can't avoid Stata entirely. But I'm really
looking forward to the day when I can avoid the fundamentally flawed design of
Stata altogether.

[^beatssas]: In my graduate program, we started learning econometrics with a
    different statistical program, called
    [SAS](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/SAS_(software)). SAS is...SAS is rough.

[^r]: I'm looking at you, [R](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/R_(programming_language)). 

[Unix Philosophy]: http://www.faqs.org/docs/artu/ch01s06.html
