---
layout: post
title: "Progressives Need Amazon to be a Problem"
date: 2014-10-20
---

A few weeks ago, Franklin Foer wrote an article at *The New Republic* arguing
that [Amazon is now a monopoly and therefore should be broken up][foer]. The
difference between Amazon and what we used to think of as monopolies, he says,
is that Amazon squeezes its producers, not its customers, and consumers are
complicit in the squeezing, which is just kind of assumed to be a bad thing.

Foer didn't offer very specific recommendations, but he did point to, say AT&T
which was broken up using antitrust law in the 1970s as a good example.

"That's silly", I thought when I first read the piece, and I didn't expect to
hear much more about it.

Today, however, Paul Krugman followed up with an op-ed that correctly identified
Amazon's relationship to its producers as a monopsony, not a
monopoly[^monopsony], and argued that it is [totally not ok, guys][krugman].

Krugman's argument zeros in on Amazon's fight with publisher Hachette. Hachette
won't agree to the revenue sharing that Amazon wants, so Amazon has
disadvantaged their books.[^conspiracy]

Like Foer, Krugman calls to mind the old progressive "victories" like the
breakup of Standard Oil, saying, "The robber baron era ended when we as a
nation decided that some business tactics were out of line. And the question is
whether we want to go back on that decision."

I think that line explains why suddenly we're all supposed to be up in arms
about Amazon. It's certainly not out of deep concern for book publishers.
Everyone hates book publishers, who squeeze authors as much as Amazon squeezes
them (and, interestingly, more than Amazon squeezes authors, at least at
present).

In fact, in a sane hour, Krugman *et al.* would probably have no
trouble agreeing that what we're really seeing here is publishers losing value
because what they do is not nearly as valuable when you don't need to
physically print all your books. Certainly they would agree that, if the market
were well and truly competitive, none of the publishers would be making money
anyway because profits in a competitive market go to zero.

But Amazon is a BIG BUSINESS with MARKET POWER, and BIG BUSINESSES with
MARKET POWER are bad and exploitative in the progressive view of the world. The
breakup of Standard Oil is a part of the progressive identity the same way
that, say, the Reagan tax cuts are part of the conservative identity.

If Amazon isn't actually hurting real people, then maybe BIG BUSINESSES with
MARKET POWER *aren't* always bad. Maybe the breakup of Standard Oil wasn't all
that huge a victory for real people after all. So it's important to the
progressive view of the world that Amazon be perceived as hurting
people.[^bushtax]

Now, there's nothing wrong with having general rules for policy, like "monopoly
is bad, let's avoid that" or "let's not try anything for the first time at the
national level." They're especially good when they've been learned over time.
But the hyper-dynamic technology-driven economy, where it's has been harder and
harder to *preserve* market power, has presented a powerful challenge to these
old progressive beliefs, and those of us not wed to them should demand that
they prove themselves again.

[^monopsony]: A monopoly is when you are the only one selling, a monopsony is
    when you are the only one buying.

[^conspiracy]: Bizarrely, Krugman also veers into conspiracy theory territory
    when he argues that Amazon wants you to read Paul Ryan's book, but not a
    book about the Koch Brothers because the shipping time is different. As he
    puts it, "Uh-huh."

[^bushtax]: A conservative analogy might be the insistence that the Bush tax
    cuts paid for themselves when they probably didn't, because acknowledging
    that might undermine the popular understanding of Reaganomics.

[foer]: http://www.newrepublic.com/article/119769/amazons-monopoly-must-be-broken-radical-plan-tech-giant
[krugman]: http://mobile.nytimes.com/2014/10/20/opinion/paul-krugman-amazons-monopsony-is-not-ok.html?referrer=

