---
title: The Metric System vs. the Soul
date: 2015-02-26
---

I found [this article][fahernheit] on Facebook[^hattip], which argues that the
Fahrenheit system is better for everyday use than the Celsius scale because it
corresponds to a human range of hot and cold, rather than to the scientific but
arbitrary freezing and boiling points of water. I find this argument obviously
correct.

But in fact, the Celsius scale is only the tip of the 32-degree iceberg. I hold
that the whole metric system dehumanizes us, when we use it out of its proper
context.

That's not me being funny to make a point: I actually believe that using the
metric system for everything cheapens the human experience. Some people use
this map, with countries that use the metric system in green and those that do
not in gray, to mock the United States as a hopeless yokel of a
nation:[^mapcredit]

![Map showing that the US is almost alone in not adopting the metic system][worldmap]

To me, that map shows the US as a lone holdout of common sense and
civilization.

The metric system was developed to accomplish a few specific goals. It
simplifies calculating higher or lower by its omnipresent powers of ten. It
aligns, where possible, different kinds of measurement; a cubic centimeter of
water is also one milliliter, and at four degrees Celsius it has a mass of one
gram. In the laboratory, say, or in large scale manufacturing, these properties
are no doubt desirable, because the extreme precision required comes most
easily when unencumbered by factors purely human.

And it is for the exact same reason that the metric system ruins the glory and
splendor and even romance of every day life. 

A meter, for example, is the length light travels in about one three-hundred
millionth of a second. That is a very precise definition, but to any person who
does not go around noting the precise locations of photons, it is a useless
definition. A foot, on the other hand, is about the length of a man's foot when
he wears a shoe.

A liter is the volume of a container 10 centimeters long, wide, and high. A cup
is about as much as you get in a cup. A pint is two of those; the perfect size
for a serving of beer.

The metric system has no connection to humanity as such. You can see this just
by looking at the arts.

When Shylock demands a pound of flesh, we shudder; if he demanded a kilogram,
we would laugh. When Falstaff says "Peace, good pint-pot" to the hostess, he is
a having a good time; if he said "Peace, good point-five-liter-pot," he would
be a pedant.

No-one would be much moved if Frost sighed "But I have promises to keep and
kilometers to go before I sleep, and kilometers to go before I sleep."

I do not say that no-one has ever or will ever write a poem about a kilometer;
only that I doubt that anyone has or will write a good one.

It does no good to say that measurement has nothing to do with art. That answer
proves my point; it loses that part of the human experience that sees the
romance in the mile of a thousand steps, that perceives the  relationship of
man to the cosmos.

The imposition of the metric system on the public first occurred during the
French Revolution. If it was the most minor atrocity of the Jacobin's bloody
and merciless rationalism, it was also the most lasting. It embodies the
Revolution's determination to cram the majestic complexity of the world into a
human mechanical design.

When someone says that we should give up our old miles for kilometers or pounds
for kilograms, what they are really saying is that our everyday life were more
like a machine, or a laboratory, or a mass production facility; that it would
be less like humanity, and less like life.

I prefer humanity to machinery, and I value art over easy convertibility. And
if I am the last man to measure my journeys in miles, I will probably be the
man who enjoys them most along the way.

[^hattip]: Hat tip to Nancy vander Veer

[^mapcredit]: [Source](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Metric_system#mediaviewer/File:Metric_system_adoption_map.svg)

[fahernheit]: http://isomorphism.es/post/3767526267/fahrenheit-versus-celsius
[worldmap]: /img/metric_system/map.svg
